Add reference recommendations to usage docs (#1314)
nf-core/rnaseq: docs/usage.md

> **NB:** The `group` and `replicate` columns were replaced with a single `sample` column as of v3.1 of the pipeline. The `sample` column is essentially a concatenation of the `group` and `replicate` columns, however it now also offers more flexibility in instances where replicate information is not required e.g. when sequencing clinical samples. If all values of `sample` have the same number of underscores, fields defined by these underscore-separated names may be used in the PCA plots produced by the pipeline, to regain the ability to represent different groupings.

> ## Reference files

Reviewer: Could we incorporate this into the existing reference files section below? See '**Explicit reference file specification (recommended)**'

> The only reference files required by the pipeline are a FASTA file with the reference genome sequence and a GTF/GFF file with a gene annotation. All other reference files can be created from those by the pipeline.
> However, selecting the appropriate reference genome and annotation to use analysis can still be difficult.
> Here we provide some advice on what is expected by the pipeline:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The pipeline has a number of options for reference files provided for maximum flexibility, but most can be generated dynamically and need not be supplied. The minimal requirement is two reference files: a FASTA file containing the reference genome sequence and a GTF/GFF file with gene annotations. Further guidance is provided below.
```

:::note

> **GENCODE vs ENSEMBL**
> 
> Two of the most common sources of genomic references are GENCODE (for mouse and human) and ENSEMBL (for many organisms).
> There has been an effort to standardise information between the two sources and now the references [should be consistent](https://www.gencodegenes.org/pages/faq.html) regardless of where they are obtained from (for mouse and human).
> 
> However, while the information is consistent, there are still some practical differences.
> ENSEMBL prefixes chromosome names with `chr` (e.g. `chr1`, `chr1`, ...) while GENCODE uses simple `1`, `2`, etc.
> There can also be different names used for sequences outside the reference chromosomes.
> GENCODE also attaches version identifiers to gene and transcript names (e.g. `ENSG00000254647.1`).
> For these reasons, resources from the two sources cannot be mixed and it is important to stick to one reference source. Some of the steps in the pipeline expect an ENSEMBL reference by default so it is important to set the `--gencode` option if your reference comes from GENCODE.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Consistent reference resource usage**

When supplying reference files as discussed below, it is important to be consistent in the reference resource used (Ensembl, Gencode, UCSC etc), since differences in conventions between these resources can make their files incompatible. For example, UCSC prefixes chromosomes with `chr`, while Ensembl does not, so a GTF file from Ensembl should not be supplied alongside a genome FASTA from UCSC.
```

I don't think we need to belabour this point- just make sure people take all their reference files from the same place.

Reviewer: Also make sure to integrate with existing content (see the existing Gencode section)

:::

### Reference genome

> It is recommended to provide the most complete reference genome for your species, without additional loci (haplotypes) or patches.
> For models organisms such as mouse or human this is the so-called "primary assembly" which includes the reference chromosomes as well as some additional scaffolds.
> For human assembly GRCh38 (hg38) this would be the `GRCh38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz` file from GENCODE or the `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz` file from ENSEMBL.
> These files are preferred as they cover the largest amount of the reference genome without including multiple copies of the same sequence which can confuse aligners such as STAR. Most other species (fly, cow, dog etc.) do not have a primary assembly, in which case the complete reference sequence, or "toplevel" assembly, should be used.
> The difference between the two is the inclusion of alternative loci (haplotypes) but these do not typically exist for species outside mouse and human.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is recommended to provide the most complete reference genome for your species, without additional loci (haplotypes) or patches. For model organisms such as mouse or human, this is the "primary assembly," which includes the reference chromosomes and some additional scaffolds. For the human assembly GRCh38 (hg38), use the `GRCh38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz` file from GENCODE or the `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz` file from ENSEMBL. These files cover the largest portion of the reference genome without including multiple copies of the same sequence, which can confuse aligners like STAR.

Most other species (e.g., fly, cow, dog) do not have a primary assembly. In these cases, use the complete reference sequence, or "toplevel" assembly. The main difference between the primary and toplevel assemblies is the inclusion of alternative loci (haplotypes), which typically do not exist for species outside of mouse and human.
```

### Gene annotation

> Gene annotations are updated more frequently than the reference genome sequence and there are more options to consider here.
> Because annotations can be updated frequently, you should rely on sources that include well-defined, versioned releases such as ENSEMBL or GENCODE.
> We generally recommend using the most recent release in order to have the latest and most up-to-date gene annotations.
> However, if you are planning to combine your data with a dataset that was processed in the past you may want to use the annotation version that was used previously for greater consistency.
> Once you have decided on a release to use, you can then select an annotation file.
> This should be the most comprehensive annotation that matches the reference genome you are using.
> So if you are using the human primary assembly you would want the comprehensive annotation for the primary assembly (the `gencode.{release}.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz` file from GENCODE or the `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.{release}.gtf.gz` file from ENSEMBL).
> For something like fly, you would want the annotation matching the toplevel assembly (e.g. `Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.46.{release}.gtf.gz` from ENSEMBL).
> As well as the comprehensive annotations for the primary and toplevel assemblies, and just the reference chromomes, GENCODE also provides "basic" annotations which only include representative transcripts, but we do not recommend using these.
> 
> Gene annotations typically provide a primary identifier for each feature as well as a more common name.
> For example, the ENSEMBL ID `ENSG00000254647` corresponds to the `INS` gene which encodes the insulin protein.
> While the gene names may be more familiar and easier to understand it is important to retain and use the primary identifiers as the are unique for a given annotation and are much easier to map between annotation versions or sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Gene annotations are updated more frequently than the reference genome sequence, so you much choose an appropriate annotation version (e.g. Ensembl release)  We recommend using sources with well-defined, versioned releases such as ENSEMBL or GENCODE. Generally, it is best to use the most recent release for the latest gene annotations. However, if you are combining your data with older datasets, use the annotation version previously used for consistency.

Once you have chosen a release, select the annotation file that matches your reference genome. For the human primary assembly, use the comprehensive annotation (e.g., `gencode.{release}.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz` from GENCODE or `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.{release}.gtf.gz` from ENSEMBL). For other species, like fly, use the annotation matching the toplevel assembly (e.g., `Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.46.{release}.gtf.gz` from ENSEMBL).

GENCODE also provides "basic" annotations, which include only representative transcripts, but we do not recommend using these.

Gene annotations provide a primary identifier for each feature as well as a common name. For example, the ENSEMBL ID `ENSG00000254647` corresponds to the `INS` gene, which encodes the insulin protein. While gene names are more familiar, it is crucial to retain and use the primary identifiers as they are unique and easier to map between annotation versions or sources.
```

> To take advantage of all the quality control modules implemented in the pipeline, the gene annotation should include a `gene_biotype` field which describes the function of each feature (protein coding, long non-coding etc.).
> This is usually the case for annotations from GENCODE or ENSEMBL but may not be if your annotation comes from another source.
> If your annotation does not include this field, please set the `--skip_biotype_qc` option to avoid running the steps that rely on it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To take advantage of all the quality control modules implemented in the pipeline, the gene annotation should include a `gene_biotype` field which describes the function of each feature (protein coding, long non-coding etc.). This is usually the case for annotations from GENCODE or ENSEMBL but may not be if your annotation comes from another source. If your annotation does not include this field, please set the `--skip_biotype_qc` option to avoid running the steps that rely on it.
```

:::note

> **GTF vs GFF**
> 
> GFF (General Feature Format) is a tab-separated text file format for representing genomic annotations.
> GTF (General Transfer Format) is a specific implementation of this format corresponding to GFF version 2.
> The pipeline can accept both GFF and GTF but any GFF files will be converted to GFF so if a GTF is available for your annotation of choice it is better to provide that directly.
> 
> More information and links to further resources are [available from ENSEMBL](https://www.ensembl.org/info/website/upload/gff.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**GTF vs GFF**

GFF (General Feature Format) is a tab-separated text file format for representing genomic annotations, while GTF (General Transfer Format) is a specific implementation of this format corresponding to GFF version 2. The pipeline can accept both GFF and GTF but any GFF files will be converted to GTF so if a GTF is available for your annotation of choice it is better to provide that directly.

More information and links to further resources are [available from ENSEMBL](https://www.ensembl.org/info/website/upload/gff.html).
```

:::

### Reference transcriptome

> As well as the reference genome sequence and annotation it is possible to provide a reference transcriptome FASTA file.
> These can be obtained from GENCODE or ENSEMBL but it is important to note that the sequences they provide only cover the reference chromosome and can result in inconsistencies if you have provided a primary or toplevel genome assembly and annotation.
> For this reason, we recommend to not provide a transcriptome FASTA and instead let the pipeline create it from the provided genome and annotation.
> As with the aligner indexes, it is possible to save the created transcriptome FASTA and BED files to a central location and provide it to future pipeline runs in order to avoid having multiple copies on your system but it is important to make sure that all genome, annotation, transcriptome and index versions match.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the reference genome sequence and annotation, you can provide a reference transcriptome FASTA file. These files can be obtained from GENCODE or ENSEMBL. However, these sequences only cover the reference chromosomes and can cause inconsistencies if you are using a primary or toplevel genome assembly and annotation.

We recommend not providing a transcriptome FASTA file and instead allowing the pipeline to create it from the provided genome and annotation. Similar to aligner indexes, you can save the created transcriptome FASTA and BED files to a central location for future pipeline runs. This helps avoid multiple copies on your system. Ensure that all genome, annotation, transcriptome, and index versions match to maintain consistency.
```

### Indexes

> Creating the index files required for the alignment and/or pseudoalignment steps can be computationally intensive and the files they produce are quite large.

Reviewer: There is already an 'indices' section that covers this. Could you suggest any improvements there please?

- If `--additional_fasta` is provided then the features in this file (e.g. ERCC spike-ins) will be automatically concatenated onto both the reference FASTA file as well as the GTF annotation before building the appropriate indices.
- When using `--aligner star_rsem`, both the STAR and RSEM indices should be present in the path specified by `--rsem_index` (see [#568](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/issues/568)).

> ### Reference genome

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Reference genome
```

Make this part of the explicit reference file section.

It is recommended to provide the most complete reference genome for your species, without additional loci (haplotypes) or patches. For model organisms such as mouse or human, this is the "primary assembly," which includes the reference chromosomes and some additional scaffolds. For the human assembly GRCh38 (hg38), use the `GRCh38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz` file from GENCODE or the `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz` file from Ensembl. These files cover the largest portion of the reference genome without including multiple copies of the same sequence, which can confuse aligners like STAR.

Most other species (e.g., fly, cow, dog) do not have a primary assembly. In these cases, use the complete reference sequence, or "toplevel" assembly. The main difference between the primary and toplevel assemblies is the inclusion of alternative loci (haplotypes), which typically do not exist for species outside of mouse and human.

> ### Gene annotation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Gene annotation
```

Make this part of the explicit reference file section.

Gene annotations are updated more frequently than the reference genome sequence, so you much choose an appropriate annotation version (e.g. Ensembl release)  We recommend using sources with well-defined, versioned releases such as ENSEMBL or GENCODE. Generally, it is best to use the most recent release for the latest gene annotations. However, if you are combining your data with older datasets, use the annotation version previously used for consistency.

Once you have chosen a release, select the annotation file that matches your reference genome. For the human primary assembly, use the comprehensive annotation (e.g., `gencode.{release}.primary_assembly.annotation.gtf.gz` from GENCODE or `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.{release}.gtf.gz` from Ensembl). For other species, like fly, use the annotation matching the toplevel assembly (e.g., `Drosophila_melanogaster.BDGP6.46.{release}.gtf.gz` from Ensembl).

> GENCODE also provides "basic" annotations, which include only representative transcripts, but we do not recommend using these.

Reviewer: Move to Gencode section

Author: All of this or just the sentence about the basic annotations? The rest doesn't seem GENCODE specific.

Reviewer: Just this Gencode bit. Seems a bit lonely here by itself.

> Gene annotations provide a primary identifier for each feature as well as a common name. For example, the Ensembl ID `ENSG00000254647` corresponds to the `INS` gene, which encodes the insulin protein. While gene names are more familiar, it is crucial to retain and use the primary identifiers as they are unique and easier to map between annotation versions or sources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensure that the annotation files use gene IDs as the primary identifier, not the gene name/ symbol. For example, the Ensembl ID `ENSG00000254647` corresponds to the `INS` gene, which encodes the insulin protein. While gene names are more familiar, it is crucial to retain and use the primary identifiers as they are unique and easier to map between annotation versions or sources.
```

Reviewer: Just putting the main point up-front in this para

Once you have the indices from a workflow run you should save them somewhere central and reuse them in subsequent runs using custom config files or command line parameters such as `--star_index '/path/to/STAR/index/'`.

> When doing this, it is important to record the genome and annotations versions they correspond to so you can easily locate the correct index to use and the program version as an index produced with one version may not have a format compatible with other versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note the genome and annotation versions as well as the versions of the software used for indexing, as an index created with one version may not be compatible with other versions.
```

Simplify a bit- and attach to previous para.

- If `--additional_fasta` is provided then the features in this file (e.g. ERCC spike-ins) will be automatically concatenated onto both the reference FASTA file as well as the GTF annotation before building the appropriate indices.
- When using `--aligner star_rsem`, both the STAR and RSEM indices should be present in the path specified by `--rsem_index` (see [#568](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/issues/568)).

#### Reference genome

> It is recommended to provide the most complete reference genome for your species, without additional loci (haplotypes) or patches. For model organisms such as mouse or human, this is the "primary assembly," which includes the reference chromosomes and some additional scaffolds. For the human assembly GRCh38 (hg38), use the `GRCh38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz` file from GENCODE or the `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz` file from Ensembl. These files cover the largest portion of the reference genome without including multiple copies of the same sequence, which can confuse aligners like STAR.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It is recommended to provide the most complete reference genome for your species, without additional loci (haplotypes) or patches. For model organisms such as mouse or human, this is the "primary assembly", which includes the reference chromosomes and some additional scaffolds. For the human assembly GRCh38 (hg38), use the `GRCh38.primary_assembly.genome.fa.gz` file from GENCODE or the `Homo_sapiens.GRCh38.dna.primary_assembly.fa.gz` file from Ensembl. These files cover the largest portion of the reference genome without including multiple copies of the same sequence, which would result in heavy mapping quality penalties.
```

> Most other species (e.g., fly, cow, dog) do not have a primary assembly. In these cases, use the complete reference sequence, or "toplevel" assembly. The main difference between the primary and toplevel assemblies is the inclusion of alternative loci (haplotypes), which typically do not exist for species outside of mouse and human.

Reviewer 2: I am hesitant recommending the top level assemblies unaltered. For the purpose of RNA-seq, that will blow up the number of multi-mapping reads and ultimately affect the quantification. Do you happen to have a reference how big the impact will be? My gut feeling would rather suggest using e.g. [seqkit grep](https://bioinf.shenwei.me/seqkit/usage/#grep) to remove the alternate loci myself if no primary assemblies are available.

Author: I haven't really worked with species outside mouse/human so I'm not really sure. This suggestion came from @tdanhorn [here](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq/issues/1086#issuecomment-2156321533). Maybe they/someone could comment on if this is correct for other species?

Reviewer 2: Well, the way how I understand it is that Thomas Danhorn only explains the difference between a _primary_ and a `toplevel `assembly. Everything that is said there is absolutely accurate. 

I just question that we should recommend using the toplevel assembly straightforwardly in case a published primary assembly is lacking.

Author: Ah, I got the impression that if there was no primary assembly then toplevel probably didn't contain alternative loci etc. so it would be fine to use. Maybe that's not correct though. Happy to have it changed to whatever is most useful.

> Most other species (e.g., fly, cow, dog) do not have a primary assembly. In these cases, use the complete reference sequence, or "toplevel" assembly. The main difference between the primary and toplevel assemblies is the inclusion of alternative loci (haplotypes), which typically do not exist for species outside of mouse and human.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, my bad. You are right, the [README](https://ftp.ensembl.org/pub/release-112/fasta/erinaceus_europaeus/dna/README) of Ensembl is quite clear on this. How about changing it to:

```suggestion
For most other species (e.g., fly, cow, dog), no primary assembly is published. This reflects inadequately characterized genomic variation and a lower degree of curation, meaning that there are no established alternative loci (haplotypes), and that the toplevel file is equivalent to a primary assembly. Therefore, while the toplevel assembly may be utilized for these organisms, it is nonetheless advisable to verify the absence of N-padded haplotype or patch regions first.
```

More information and links to further resources are [available from Ensembl](https://www.ensembl.org/info/website/upload/gff.html).
:::

### Reference transcriptome

In addition to the reference genome sequence and annotation, you can provide a reference transcriptome FASTA file. These files can be obtained from GENCODE or Ensembl. However, these sequences only cover the reference chromosomes and can cause inconsistencies if you are using a primary or toplevel genome assembly and annotation.

We recommend not providing a transcriptome FASTA file and instead allowing the pipeline to create it from the provided genome and annotation. Similar to aligner indexes, you can save the created transcriptome FASTA and BED files to a central location for future pipeline runs. This helps avoid redundant computation and having multiple copies on your system. Ensure that all genome, annotation, transcriptome, and index versions match to maintain consistency.

> ### Indices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Indices
```

Once you have the indices from a workflow run you should save them somewhere central and reuse them in subsequent runs using custom config files or command line parameters such as `--star_index '/path/to/STAR/index/'`.

Remember to note the genome and annotation versions as well as the versions of the software used for indexing, as an index created with one version may not be compatible with other versions.

> ### GENCODE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### GENCODE
```

If you are using [GENCODE](https://www.gencodegenes.org/) reference genome files please specify the `--gencode` parameter because the format of these files is slightly different to ENSEMBL genome files:

- The `--gtf_group_features_type` parameter will automatically be set to `gene_type` as opposed to `gene_biotype`, respectively.
- If you are running Salmon, the `--gencode` flag will also be passed to the index building step to overcome parsing issues resulting from the transcript IDs in GENCODE fasta files being separated by vertical pipes (`|`) instead of spaces (see [this issue](https://github.com/COMBINE-lab/salmon/issues/15)).

As well as the standard annotations, GENCODE also provides "basic" annotations, which include only representative transcripts, but we do not recommend using these.

> ### Prokaryotic genome annotations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Prokaryotic genome annotations
```
